A miracle which Saint Mena, the Martyr of Christ, performed.  In God’s love, Amen.
Beloved!
A woman lived in a village, in the region of Alexandria.
And she, being infertile, could give birth neither a son nor a  daughter.
She had a lot of perishable wealth.
But she did not have a heir.
And because of this(, knowing that?) she was ashamed, in her  heart.
And all who lived in her house were also infertile: the servant- girls, the cows and even the chickens.
And one day, she hears how Christian women (or: shepards)  tell about the miracles which they performe in the church of  Saint Mena in Mareotes, and she said to herself:
“Here it is, truly, if the God of Saint Mena made one of my  chickens give birth, I will donate to his church the egg that it  has first laid.”
When many a day passed, one of the chickens became preg- nant and gave birth offspring, i.e., one egg.
And that woman went down to the river with a servant-girl,  in order to find a boat and take that egg to the church of Saint  Mena located in Mareotes.
And finding a boat ready (or: loaded) to go to Philoxenite, the  woman said to the skipper: “Greetings, father skipper.”
And he said: “Greetings to you too.”
And the woman said: “Truly, when everything is ready, where  will you go?” (or: “Truly, when you depart from here, where  will you go?”).
The skipper said: “Truly, if the Lord guide me, I am going to  Philoxenite.”
And the woman said: “If you have mercy on me, do me a favor  and take me with you to Philoxenite.”
The skipper said: “What do you want there?”
The woman said: “I am going to the church of Saint Mena.”
And the skipper said: “But a heathen like you, what will you do  in the church?”
The woman said: “I will bring this egg to that church, in order  that the God of Saint Mena may give me fertility (or: off- spring).”
“Truly, if I give birth, I shall become Christian!”
The skipper said: “Woman, do not be anxious!”
“Do not be anxious, and give me that (or: your) egg.”
“For I will take it away.”
And you return to your house, so that your husband will not  fear for you.
And the woman believed and placed the egg in his hand.
And she returned to her house, with her servant-girl.
And the skipper took the egg, placed it within the hold [of the  boat] and set it among the rest of the provisions for the trip to  Philoxenite.
When many a day passed, he came to the shore of Philoxenite.
But the man forgot about the egg and returned to the place  from where he departed.
And one day, the skipper saw within the hold of the boat  among the rest of the provisions that egg, this one which he  had placed and forgotten, he said to his son:
“Oh boy, where does this egg come from?”
And he said: “Father, you remember, a woman gave it to us, in  order to take it away to the church of Saint Mena.”
And the father said to the son: “Oh, indeed. Cook it and bring it  to me so that I may eat it.”
And when his son cooked and placed it before him, he took it  and ate it.
When the days of three months had gone by, they came to a  village.
And (they) beached the boat at the shore of that village.
When the Sunday day begun, the skipper went up to the village  to receive the sacrament.
And in that village was situated a church of Saint Mary.
And he entered it to receive the sacrament.
And after the Trisagion, all the people assembled at the bap- tistery, in order to cross themselves with the water of the holy  one.
And when the eyes of the skipper were opened, he saw Saint  Mena brigthly (or: clearly), riding a white horse and holding a  hunting spear (or: targeting a spear in flames).
And when he saw (that), he, in fear, approached the image of  Saint Mary and shouted:
“May it be your will, Saint Mary, save me, because I have com- mitted sin.”
And again Saint Mena revealed himself and said to him:
“What am I to do with you today?
It is because my Lord’s will that I came.”
And when the Saint took that man and kicked him in the  head, the egg, this one which he ate, suddenly became a living  chicken, and came out from under him, stood up and at once  squawked.
And Saint Mena, sitting on the horse, grasped the chicken by  its two wings, took it up and said:
“For this I came, this I gave birth.” (?)
And Saint Mena went to the house of that woman, knocked on  the door and called (for her):
And that woman came running and opened the door.
And the Saint said to her:
“Woman, take this chicken and place it among your chickens so  that they may give birth for you.
And also you, oh woman, when you give birth to a son, call his  name Mena.
Also your servant-girls will give birth, and so will your cows.
And you, oh woman, receive baptism for remission of your  sins.
And having said that, the Saint at once disappeared (?).
And when the woman place the chicken among her chickens,  they at one started giving birth, the servantgirls, and so did the  cows.
And also she, (that) woman, became pregnant and gave birth  offspring, i.e., a son.
And she called his name Mena, according as the Saint had said  to her.
And also her servant-girls became pregnant and gave birth to  sons and daughters.
And that woman, when the days of her sickness had passed,  went to the church of Saint Mena in Mareotes.
And when she came into the holy church, she begged the priest  to baptize her.
And the priest took them, prayed for them and baptized her,  her husband, her son, and her servants in the name of the  Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost.
And thus they became Christians, and so they remained all the  days of their life.
And being servants of the church of Saint Mena, they made  their offering to the church until their death.
And all who saw this great miracle or listened (about it), gave  glory to God and Saint Mena, whose is the glory and the power,  now and forever, unto the times of the ages. Amen.
